---
title: 'The True Horror of Horror Movies'
date: 2020-01-20
permalink: /posts/2020/01/the_true_horror_of_horror_movies/
tags:
  - mental health
  - movies
---

Not everyone can stomach or appreciates a horror movie, and for good reason. Often filled with fright, gore, and truly disturbing content, horror movies can deliver visceral sensations including true disgust. The recent popularity of "Megan is Missing", a 2014 film about the abduction of a teenage girl, on TikTok is an example of a horror film that arguably did not need to exist. If it's purpose was to shed light on child abduction, there were much better ways, and if it's purpose was to simply entertain, there were much better options out there. However, if it's purpose was to frighten and potentially traumatize, it certainly accomplished that.

This is where a potentially problematic issue arises. A portion of horror movies utilize mental illness as the main fright. Often times, the character with mental illness descends into complete madness and harms the main characters. If the film viewer has never interacted with someone with psychosis, it can leave them with an unfortunate impression. Many people fear and misunderstand those with mental illness, especially those with psychosis. And consequences from that fear and misunderstanding, such as a higher rate of death by police, can arise. Now, horror movies do have the aspects of one, being fiction and for the purpose of entertainment, and two, a demon or religious cult that can explain the behavior. But at the same time, cinema does have a history and the artistic prowess to shape a person's perspective and beliefs. Jordan Peele's "Get Out" remarkably demonstrated a feeling that Black people may have about how White and even Asian people view them. So, we could assume that horror movies can shape someone's perspective on mental illness, for better or for worse.

Now though, we have to be realistic about the impact of horror movies. Many horror movies leave much to be desired as they are not exactly works of art but rather, they can be produced for cheap and make a good amount of money back. And other genres, like indies and dramas have demonstrated the stories of people with mental illness have gone and will go through in a respectable manner or ugly fashion. And if anything, the movies that inspired this piece, ("Hereditary", "The Taking of Deborah Logan", "A Tale of Two Sisters", etc.) are, in my opinion, genuinely exceptional movies. I guess that to an extent, I was worried that others may develop unproductive opinions of those with psychosis, opinions that lead to exclusion and violence. Horror movies feel like they have this property of sticking in your mind for longer than you want, since it's not so easy to forget a scare as it is to forget an action movie fight or a comedy movie joke. But, does the impact of horror films truly outweigh the impact of underfunding mental health? Probably not. In the end, the true horror of a horror film is the price of admission for a cheap scare in the past or stumbling upon the occasional, absolutely horrendous film that makes you question the sanity of the director.
